PHP-8 Attributes (#3)
Dgame/blog: content/php8-attributes/index.md

+++
title = "PHP 8 - Attributes: How to (de)serialize data structures smoothly"
date = 2021-01-01
[taxonomies]
tags = ["PHP", "PHP 8", "Serde", "Rust"]
+++

> With PHP 8 a lot of long awaited features came. I'm really excited about `match` expressions, constructor property promotion, named arguments, but I dare to say that many aren't that excited about attributes as I'm. I've heard that many even asked "Yeah, what about them? What are they for?" and that's what I want to show you. First of all I'm - after that long struggle - glad that they have the same syntax as in Rust! It's just great in my opinion and one syntax tweak less I have to think about.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With PHP 8 a lot of long awaited features were release. I'm really excited about `match` expressions, constructor property promotion, named arguments, but I dare to say that many aren't that excited about attributes as I am. I've heard that many even asked "Yeah, what about them? What are they for?" and that's what I want to show you. First of all I'm - after that long struggle - glad that they have the same syntax as in Rust! It's just great in my opinion and one syntax tweak less I have to think about.
```

But what can you do with them? You may have [read about them](https://stitcher.io/blog/attributes-in-php-8) on [stitcher.io](https://stitcher.io/) which gave a neat first impression what they are capable of. But I'm more interested in my long journey of serializing / deserializing data structures. In Rust there is this amazing tool called [serde](https://serde.rs/) with which you can serialize and deserialize from and into many different data formats like json, toml etc. I've never found a smiliar tool in PHP. Sure, you can use the Zend Hydrator or it's brethren (e.g. from Symfony) but they aren't that smooth in my opinion. Let's just look on how serde handles it:

```rust
#[derive(Deserialize)]
struct Foo {
    #[serde(default = 42)]
    #[serde(rename = "id")]
    #[serde(alias = "Id")]
    #[serde(alias = "ID")]
    my_id: u32
}

let foo: Foo = serde_json::from_str("{ \"id\": 23 }").unwrap();
```
<small>Of course we could smash those attributes in one long statement</small>

> I often thought about implementing it in such way in PHP, but each time I instantly discarded that idea as soon as it came to my mind. That's because prior to PHP 8 you had to use doc-comments. And parsing them or even relying on such a textual structure was just painful. But now, with attributes in php 8? Worth considering! Let's see how we _could_ translate this to modern PHP:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I often thought about implementing it the same way in PHP, but each time I instantly discarded that idea as soon as it came to my mind. That's because prior to PHP 8 you had to use doc-comments. And parsing them or even relying on such a textual structure was just painful. But now, with attributes in php 8? Worth considering! Let's see how we _could_ translate this to modern PHP:
```

```php
<?php

final class Foo {
    use Json\Deserialize;

    #[Rename(deserialize: "id")]
    #[DefaultValue(42)]
    #[Alias("Id")]
    #[Alias("ID")]
    public int $myId;
}

$foo = Foo::deserialize("{ \"id\": 23 }");
```

<small>It's `DefaultValue` instead of just `Default` because the later is a reserved keyword in PHP</small>

So first of all, we need some attributes (also called _annotation_'s in other languages):

```php
<?php

namespace Dgame\Serde\Annotation;

use Attribute;

#[Attribute(Attribute::TARGET_PROPERTY | Attribute::IS_REPEATABLE)]
final class Alias
{
    public function __construct(public string $alias)
    {
    }
}

#[Attribute(Attribute::TARGET_PROPERTY)]
final class DefaultValue
{
    public function __construct(public mixed $value = null)
    {
    }
}

#[Attribute(Attribute::TARGET_PROPERTY)]
final class Rename
{
    public function __construct(public ?string $deserialize = null, public ?string $serialize = null)
    {
    }
}
```

> To define your own attributes, you have to annotate them with `#[Attribute]`. If you do that, you can smash them on everything you want, properties, classes, parameters etc. But we want to limit this only to properties, therefore, we have to specify the attribute-flags (the first and only constructor argument) as such: `Attribute::TARGET_PROPERTY`. What about `Attribute::IS_REPEATABLE`? Normally we cannot annotate something with the same attribute twice, but in the case of `Alias` we want to allow that, therefore we have to extend the attribute-flags (which is a bit-mask) with `Attribute::IS_REPEATABLE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To define your own attributes, you have to annotate them with `#[Attribute]`. If you do that, you can smash them on everything you want: properties, classes, parameters etc. But we want to limit this only to properties. Therefore, we have to specify the attribute-flags (the first and only constructor argument) as such: `Attribute::TARGET_PROPERTY`. What about `Attribute::IS_REPEATABLE`? Normally we cannot annotate something with the same attribute twice, but in the case of `Alias` we want to allow that, therefore we have to extend the attribute-flags (which is a bit-mask) with `Attribute::IS_REPEATABLE`.
```

With that in mind, we can do the interpretation with specialized `Deserializers`:

```php
<?php

namespace Dgame\Serde\Deserializer;

interface Deserializer
{
    public function deserialize(mixed $input): mixed;

    public function getDefaultValue(): mixed;
}
```

> A `Deserializer` accepts an `mixed` argument and translates it to the wanted type, for example for `int`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `Deserializer` accepts a `mixed` argument and translates it to the wanted type. For example for `int`:
```

    }

    public function getDefaultValue(): int
    {
        return 0;
    }
}
```

<small>To keep it simple and short, we just use an `assert`.</small>

We need `Deserializer`s for each built-in type and for _user defined objects_. The later is somewhat special, because a class contains properties which have their own types and probably their own annotations. So we need to cover that:

```php
<?php

namespace Dgame\Serde\Deserializer;

use ReflectionClass;
use stdClass;

final class UserDefinedObjectDeserializer implements Deserializer
{
    public function __construct(private ReflectionClass $reflection)
    {
        foreach ($reflection->getProperties() as $property) {
            // TODO: Here is where the "magic" happens
        }
    }

    public function getDefaultValue(): ?object
    {
        return null;
    }

    public function deserialize(mixed $input): object
    {
        assert($input instanceof stdClass);

        $object = $this->reflection->newInstanceWithoutConstructor();
        // TODO: deserialize the $input and hydrate the $object

        return $object;
    }
}
```

You may have wondered about `assert($input instanceof stdClass);`.

> If we want to e.g. deserialize json, we have two options: either decode it as an associative array or as a `stdClass`. Most of the time, we want to have an associative array but in this case, we really want a `stdClass`. The reason for that is simple: if we had an assoc. array, we could not easily differentiate between real (assoc.) array and objects. But with a `stdClass` we can: each object is a `stdClass` and each array an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to e.g. deserialize json, we have two options: either decode it as an associative array or as a `stdClass`. Most of the time we want to have an associative array but in this case, we really want a `stdClass`. The reason for that is simple: if we had an assoc. array, we could not easily differentiate between real (assoc.) array and objects. But with a `stdClass` we can: each object is a `stdClass` and each array is an array.
```

                continue;
            }

            $property = $this->reflection->getProperty($propertyName);
            $value = $this->extractValue($input, $propertyName);
            if ($value === null && $property->hasDefaultValue()) {
                continue;
            }

            $value = $deserializer->deserialize($value);
            if ($value !== null || $this->isNullValidArgument($property)) {
                $property->setAccessible(true);
                $property->setValue($object, $value);
            }
        }

        return $object;
    }

    private function isNullValidArgument(ReflectionProperty $property): bool
    {
        $type = $property->getType();
        if ($type === null) {
            return true;
        }

        return $type->allowsNull();
    }

    private function extractValue(stdClass $input, string $name): mixed
    {
        $names = [$name, ...$this->alias[$name] ?? []];
        foreach ($names as $alias) {
            if (!property_exists($input, $alias)) {
                continue;
            }

            return $input->{$alias};
        }

        return null;
    }
}
```

> Let's get over it piece by piece:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's go over it piece by piece:
```

```php
<?php
// ...
if (!$this->reflection->hasProperty($propertyName)) {
    continue;
}
// ...
```

First of all, if, for some reason, the property isn't there, we do nothing.

```php
<?php
// ...
$value = $this->extractValue($input, $propertyName);
// ...
```

We need to extract the value of the `$input` with which the current property should be assigned.

```php
<?php
// ...
$property = $this->reflection->getProperty($propertyName);
if ($value === null && $property->hasDefaultValue()) {
    continue;
}
// ...
```

> If the belonging value in `$input` is `null` and the property has an default-value, we keep that default-value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the corresponding value in `$input` is `null` and the property has a default-value, we keep that default-value.
```

```php
<?php
// ...
$value = $deserializer->deserialize($value);
if ($value !== null || $this->isNullValidArgument($property)) {
    $property->setAccessible(true);
    $property->setValue($object, $value);
}
// ...
```

At last, we deserialize the value with the corresponding `Deserializer`. If the value is non-null or the property allows null, we assign it. Otherwise, it'll stay uninitialized.

## What about arrays?

Arrays are a bit special. Since PHP does not support generics (yet), we have no way of knowing, what specific types are stored inside of them. In Languages like Rust, Java etc. you have `Vec<T>` or `List<T>` where `T` is the specific type. Also, in PHP an array can hold multiple absolute different types. So for simplicity, we just support arrays which have values of the same type. But how do we specify, which type it is?

Consider this:

```php
<?php

final class Bar
{
    use Json\Deserialize;

    /**
     * @var Foo[] $children
     */
    private array $children;
}

$bar = Bar::deserialize("{ \"children\": [ { \"id\": 42 } ] }");
```

> We have no way of knowing, that `$children` is a array of `Foo`. Even if we would rely on the doc-comments, it's optional and there is no way to ensure it's correct. Therefore we need to add the `ArrayOf` _Attribute_:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have no way of knowing, that `$children` is an array of `Foo`. Even if we would rely on the doc-comments, it's optional and there is no way to ensure it's correct. Therefore we need to add the `ArrayOf` _Attribute_:
```

            [0] => A Object
                (
                    [id:A:private] => 1
                )

            [1] => A Object
                (
                    [id:A:private] => 2
                )

        )

)
B Object
(
    [as:B:private] => Array
        (
            [a] => A Object
                (
                    [id:A:private] => 1
                )

            [b] => A Object
                (
                    [id:A:private] => 2
                )

        )

)
```

That looks promising! But, it's still nasty to assembly these `Deserializer` by hand. What I want is, to use a trait to inject the deserialize-functionality into the specific class.
Here's how we _could_ do it:

```php
<?php

namespace Dgame\Serde\Deserializer;

use ReflectionClass;
use stdClass;

trait Deserialize
{
    private static ?UserDefinedObjectDeserializer $deserializer = null;

    public static function deserialize(stdClass $input): static
    {
        if (self::$deserializer === null) {
            self::$deserializer = new UserDefinedObjectDeserializer(new ReflectionClass(static::class));
        }

        return self::$deserializer->deserialize($input);
    }
}
```

> With that we would be able to do our examples without configuring all of the `Deserializer`. And if we want to deserialize json or another format? well, we _could_ just use another `Deserialize`-trait in another namespace which delegates the deserialize process to the "main" `Deserialize`-trait:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With that we would be able to do our examples without configuring all of the `Deserializer`. And if we want to deserialize json or another format? Well, we _could_ just use another `Deserialize`-trait in another namespace which delegates the deserialize process to the "main" `Deserialize`-trait:
```

```php
<?php

namespace Dgame\Serde\Json;

use stdClass;

trait Deserialize
{
    use \Dgame\Serde\Deserializer\Deserialize;

    public static function deserializeJson(string $content): ?static
    {
        $input = json_decode($content, associative: false, flags: JSON_THROW_ON_ERROR);

        return $input instanceof stdClass ? self::deserialize($input) : null;
    }
}
```

And with that we can test it:

```php
<?php

// usings etc.

final class C
{
    use Deserialize;

    #[DefaultValue(1337)]
    #[Alias("Id")]
    #[Alias("ID")]
    private int $id;
}

print_r(C::deserializeJson('{ }'));
print_r(C::deserializeJson('{ "id": 1 }'));
print_r(C::deserializeJson('{ "Id": 2 }'));
print_r(C::deserializeJson('{ "ID": 3 }'));
```

Output:
```
C Object
(
    [id:C:private] => 1337
)
C Object
(
    [id:C:private] => 1
)
C Object
(
    [id:C:private] => 2
)
C Object
(
    [id:C:private] => 3
)
```

Perfect! Seems like we're done.

## Summary

> We just made a simple but reliable deserializer thanks to the PHP 8 attributes. The `Serializer` components are a lot easier, therefore I wont cover that here. I hope you enjoyed that little ride and that you experienced how cool the new PHP 8 features are!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We just made a simple but reliable deserializer thanks to the PHP 8 attributes. The `Serializer` components are a lot easier, therefore I wont cover it here. I hope you enjoyed this little ride and experienced how cool the new PHP 8 features are!
```
